Adds a new decision record about the implementation of sonobuoy as KaaS test suite (#392)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0200-v1-sonobuoy-kaas-conformance-tests.md

  - [kubernetes/test/e2e/framework](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/e2e)
  - [kubernetes/test/conformance/image/go-runner](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/conformance/image/go-runner)

PROS:
   - The [Kubernetes' own e2e tests][k8s-e2e-tests] already provide a vast amount of examples from which we can develop our own tests
   - Compared to _option 1_, the [non-goals][e2e-frame-nongoals] of the [e2e-framework][e2e-frame] can be seen as the advantages of using [Kubernetes' own e2e-tests][k8s-e2e-tests].

CONS:
  - not easy to implement, as we would have to copy part of the Kubernetes repository and track the changes there as well.
  - According to [README.md](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/cluster#readme), part of it seems to be outdated and might change in the future.
   - Compared to _option 1_, the [goals][e2e-frame-goals] of the [e2e-framework][e2e-frame] can be seen as the disadvantages of using [Kubernetes' own e2e-tests][k8s-e2e-tests].

> TODO: provide proof of work: _kaas-sonobuoy-go-example-k8s-e2e_

#### _Option 3_ Write Python scripts for tests

> Apply the already implemented conformance test python scripts and also continue
> writing future tests in python. Therefore, we would need to write a wrapper
> around the conformance tests scripts in order to make them executable as a
> Sonobuoy plug in. This includes  the collection of the test results and the
> Generation of the "done" file at the end. Furthermore, we could do this with a
> simple handler that executes each test script in a sequential order. All of
> this can then be stored in a container image and uploaded to a container
> registry that Sonobuoy can use within the k8s-cluster-api-provider.
> 
> This approach also leaves the decision open as to which test framework should be
> used for Python. Hence, if we follow this approach, we need to create a
> framework of our own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sonobuoy makes it possible to write tests in Python and execute like other tests in a pod on the K8s cluster.
It would therefore be possible to keep on writing conformance tests in Python.

This option would require a wrapper in order to make the tests scripts executable as Sonobuoy plugins.
This wrapper, as mentioned earlier, would need to include the collection of test results as well as the generation of the "Done" file after the test execution is finished. This could be managed by executing each test script in a sequential order. All of this could then be stored in a container image and uploaded to a registry in order to be usable by Sonobuoy within the k8s-cluster-api-provider.

This approach also leaves the decision open as to which test framework should be
used for Python, which should be decided in a secondary Decision Record.
```

Rewrote this part.

> proof of work: [k8s-default-storage-class](../Tests/kaas/k8s-default-storage-class)

> PROS:
>     - We can continue to use the current Python scripts
>         - However, only 2 scripts have been implemented so far. Rewriting them in Go should be a feasible task.
> 
> CONS:
>     - We would need to write our own test framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PROS:
    - continue using the already available Python tests
        - only a small number of tests is implemented thus far

CONS:
    - no "native" support in Sonobuoy, a wrapper is needed
    - decision for a framework is still not done
```

---

> title: Sonobuoy - KaaS conformance test framework

Reviewer: Sure I can agree with that, adapted in the next commit.

> title: Sonobuoy - KaaS conformance test framework

Reviewer: I also renamed the file to reflect that title change.

type: Decision Record
status: Draft
track: KaaS
---

> ## Introduction - Motivation

Reviewer: Well that shouldn't be like that.

With the [k8s-cluster-api-provider][k8s-api], the SCS provides a tool to generate
and manage k8s clusters on top of its IaaS infrastructure. As part of
the application, [Sonobuoy][sonobuoy] is used as a test suite to execute the
official [Kubernetes e2e tests][k8s-e2e-tests]. Future and existing conformance
tests derived from SCS standards are perhaps part of these tests and could therefore

> be provided by running the integrated [Sonobuoy e2e test plugin][e2e test plugin].

Reviewer 2: I think words like "perhaps" should be avoided. Furthermore this reads like you expect our conformance tests could be part of the *upstream* Kubernetes E2E tests at some point, is this intended?

What sounds more logical to me is the following: we expect that current and future tests derived from SCS standards will benefit from (or even require) the testing mechanism(s) that Sonobuoy provides.

Reviewer: Yeah that sounds better, I replaced that in the latest commit.

for the results file within a folder, as seen in following image:
![image search api](https://sonobuoy.io/img/plugin-contract.png)

In order to use the existing conformance tests as a Sonobuoy plugin, a wrapper
around the individual test scripts would be required. This wrapper would need to
have the following effects:

* gathers all test results and provides them in the results file
* run tests in sequence and signal the worker when it's finished by generating a "Done" file

Apart from providing the test results, a plugin container must also forward the
status of each test by setting a status flag in the results file.
Additionally, the tests would need to be able to run inside a pod in the K8s cluster under test.

## Design Considerations

There are different approaches to create a Sonobuoy plugin, which are discussed
below in order to find a best practice for the SCS project. The documented approaches
show one example each in order to give a better representation to the reader.

Sonobuoy provides plugin examples in the repository <https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/sonobuoy-plugins>,
which are referenced throughout this section.

> ### _Option 1_ Go approach 1: Pick a framework from the Sonobuoy plugin examples

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### _Option 1_ Golang based approach 1: Pick a framework from the Sonobuoy plugin examples
```

As mentioned in the [motivation][e2e-frame-motivation] of the [e2e-framework][e2e-frame],
the project was created to circumvent the disadvantages of [Kubernetes' own e2e-tests][k8s-e2e-tests],
which are described in more detail in the [goals][e2e-frame-goals].

PROS:

* arguments in favor of this framework can also be found under the [goals description][e2e-frame-goals] of the documentation
* [e2e-framework][e2e-frame] is a well-defined framework, that allows the handling of resource creation and deletion
* official framework provided by "Kubernetes-sigs"

CONS:

* arguments not in favor of this framework can be derived from the [Non-Goals][e2e-frame-nongoals] description of the documentation:
  * "no responsibility for bootstrapping or the execution of the tests themselves" can be ignored, as this is partly taken over by Sonobuoy
  * "no mock or fake cluster components" can be ignored, since the e2e tests of SCS should be used to test real clusters and their functionality
  * for this test procedure, the Sonobuoy e2e plugin should be run in addition to the SCS KaaS conformance tests

> proof of concept: `../Tests/kaas/kaas-sonobuoy-go-example-e2e-framework/`

> ### _Option 2_ Go approach 2: Reuse the Kubernetes own e2e test infrastructure and framework

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### _Option 2_ Golang based approach 2: Reuse the Kubernetes own e2e test infrastructure and framework
```

* [kubernetes/hack/conformance](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/hack/conformance)
* [kubernetes/hack/make-rules](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/hack/make-rules)

PROS:

* [Kubernetes' own e2e tests][k8s-e2e-tests] already provide a vast amount of examples, which could be reused to develop specific SCS tests
* compared to _option 1_, the [non-goals][e2e-frame-nongoals] of the [e2e-framework][e2e-frame] can be seen as the advantages of using [Kubernetes' own e2e-tests][k8s-e2e-tests].

CONS:

* not easy to implement, as we would have to copy part of the Kubernetes repository and track the changes from the upstream
* according to [README.md](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/cluster#readme), part of it seems to be outdated and might change with a future version
  * compared to _option 1_, the [goals][e2e-frame-goals] of the [e2e-framework][e2e-frame] can be seen as the disadvantages of using [Kubernetes' own e2e-tests][k8s-e2e-tests].

> TODO: provide proof of concept: _kaas-sonobuoy-go-example-k8s-e2e_

> #### _Option 3_ Write Python scripts for tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### _Option 3_ Write Python scripts for tests
```

the test execution is finished. This could be managed by executing each test script
in a sequential order.

The wrapper as well as the python tests and test framework could then be stored
in a container image and uploaded to a registry in order to be usable by Sonobuoy
within the k8s-cluster-api-provider.

This approach also leaves the decision open as to which test framework should be
used for Python, which should be decided in a secondary Decision Record.

> proof of work: `../Tests/kaas/k8s-default-storage-class`

PROS:

* continue using the already available Python tests
  * only a small number of tests is implemented thus far

CONS:

* no "native" support in Sonobuoy, a wrapper is needed
* decision for a framework is still not done

## Pros and Cons of Different Approaches

### Providing Sonobuoy plugin image

There are two potential approaches for building the Sonobuoy images, which can be selected
independent of the chosen framework. The pros and cons of the approaches can be seen
in the following section.

#### _Option 1_ Public container registry

The image can be made available via a public container registry, which would require

> a regular job (probably CI/CD) to build and publish the image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a regular job (e.g., CI/CD) to build and publish the image.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if the `,` is correct there, but I replaced the `probably` at least.

As a first decision, "_Option 2_ Go Approach 2: Reuse Kubernetes' own e2e test infrastructure and framework"
is the least viable, as it would mean copying almost all the files used from
the Kubernetes e2e tests. This framework is closely linked to the development of
the Kubernetes code. Therefore, changes to its structure mainly are in line with its usage
in the Kubernetes repository itself and is probably not relevant for other parties.
Changes in the framework cloud have a greater impact on our side as they are
predictable. The development effort gained by reusing these examples could be
outweighed by the investment necessary to adapt tests to the corresponding framework changes.

This leaves "_Option 1_ Go approach 1: Pick framework from the Sonobuoy plugin examples"
and "_Option 3_ Write Python scripts for tests" as methods for implementing test cases.
It is possible to use both approaches in parallel, which would enable usage of both Python
and Go code. This could possibly generate two Sonobuoy plugins, but this isn't a necessity.

## Documents

[k8s-e2e-tests]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/e2e
[sonobuoy]: https://sonobuoy.io/

> [sonobuoy-plugin-docu]: https://sonobuoy.io/docs/v0.57.0/plugins/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[sonobuoy-plugin-docu]: https://sonobuoy.io/docs/main/plugins/
```

(Because the other URLs also do not refer to a specific Sonobuoy release.)

> [e2e test plugin]: https://sonobuoy.io/docs/main/e2eplugin/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[e2e-test-plugin]: https://sonobuoy.io/docs/main/e2eplugin/
```

(Slug format should be used to be consistent.)

Reviewer: Yeah can agree with that.

---
title: Sonobuoy - KaaS conformance test framework
type: Decision Record
status: Draft
track: KaaS
---

## Introduction - Motivation

With the [k8s-cluster-api-provider][k8s-api], the SCS provides a tool to generate

> and manage k8s clusters on top of its OpenStack IAAS infrastructure. As part of

Reviewer: Good point, changed in latest commit.

which are referenced throughout this section.

### _Option 1_ Go approach 1: Pick a framework from the Sonobuoy plugin examples

The seemingly most interesting plugin is the [e2e-skeleton][e2e-skel], which uses
the [kubernetes-sigs/e2e-framework][e2e-frame]. The [kubernetes-sigs/e2e-framework][e2e-frame]
is a stand-alone project that is separate from the official [Kubernetes e2e tests][k8s-e2e-tests].
The framework provides proper documentation as well as helper functions that abstract
client functionalities, similar to those found in "kubernetes/kubernetes/test/e2e/framework" repository.

As mentioned in the [motivation][e2e-frame-motivation] of the [e2e-framework][e2e-frame],
the project was created to circumvent the disadvantages of [Kubernetes' own e2e-tests][k8s-e2e-tests],
which are described in more detail in the [goals][e2e-frame-goals].

PROS:

* arguments in favor of this framework can also be found under the [goals description][e2e-frame-goals] of the documentation
* [e2e-framework][e2e-frame] is a well-defined framework, that allows the handling of resource creation and deletion
* official framework provided by "Kubernetes-sigs"

CONS:

> * compared to Python, Go is a less common programming language

Reviewer: Agreed.

* arguments not in favor of this framework can also be derived from the [Non-Goals][e2e-frame-nongoals] description of the documentation:
  * "no responsibility for bootstrapping or the execution of the tests themselves" can be ignored, as this is partly taken over by Sonobuoy
  * "no mock or fake cluster components" can be ignored, since the e2e tests of SCS should be used to test real clusters and their functionality

>   * for this test procedure, the Sonobuoy e2e plugin should be run in addition to the SCS kaas conformance tests

Reviewer: Changed in latest commit.

tests in a pod on the K8s cluster. It would therefore be possible to keep on writing
conformance tests in Python.

This option would require a wrapper in order to make the tests scripts executable
as Sonobuoy plugins. This wrapper, as mentioned earlier, would need to capture
the collection of test results as well as the generation of the "Done" file after
the test execution is finished. This could be managed by executing each test script
in a sequential order.

The wrapper as well as the python tests and test framework could then be stored
in a container image and uploaded to a registry in order to be usable by Sonobuoy
within the k8s-cluster-api-provider.

This approach also leaves the decision open as to which test framework should be
used for Python, which should be decided in a secondary Decision Record.

> proof of work: `../Tests/kaas/k8s-default-storage-class`

PROS:

* continue using the already available Python tests
  * only a small number of tests is implemented thus far

CONS:

* no "native" support in Sonobuoy, a wrapper is needed
* decision for a framework is still not done

## Pros and Cons of Different Approaches

> ### Providing Sonobuoy plugin image

Reviewer 3: IMO Option 1 below is the expected way how the Sonobuoy plugin image should be 
published for end-users. Option 2 is the expected way how to develop locally some new Sonobuoy tests. 

Therefore, IMO this section is not necessary.

Reviewer: I guess your right about that. I will push a separate commit to address this and change the section (or previous section) up to reflect on these information and present them shortly.

There are two potential approaches for building the Sonobuoy images, which can be selected
independent of the chosen framework. The pros and cons of the approaches can be seen
in the following section.

> #### _Option 1_ GitHub container registry

Reviewer: I agree with that, changed it in the latest commit.
